Overhaul state and backends documentation (#4869)
pulumi/docs: content/docs/intro/concepts/state.md

aliases: ["/docs/reference/state/"]
---

> Pulumi stores metadata about your infrastructure so that it can manage your cloud resources. This metadata is called _state_ and is how Pulumi knows when and how to create, read, delete, or update cloud resources. Pulumi stores this metadata, the state, in a _backend_ of your choosing. Options include the Pulumi Service, a secure and reliable hosted application with policies and safeguards to facilitate team collaboration, in addition to object storage in AWS, Azure, GCP, or a simple filesystem. Most of the time, you don't need to explicitly worry about state and backends, but in some cases you may.

Reviewer: Maybe we should define what a "backend" actually is?

> Pulumi stores metadata about your infrastructure so that it can manage your cloud resources. This metadata is called _state_ and is how Pulumi knows when and how to create, read, delete, or update cloud resources. Pulumi stores this metadata, the state, in a _backend_ of your choosing. Options include the Pulumi Service, a secure and reliable hosted application with policies and safeguards to facilitate team collaboration, in addition to object storage in AWS, Azure, GCP, or a simple filesystem. Most of the time, you don't need to explicitly worry about state and backends, but in some cases you may.

Reviewer: AWS also means AWS compatible - e.g. Minio / DigitalOcean / Ceph etc

Author: Does our current S3 backend support those? I thought `s3://` automatically assumes the bucket is in AWS. If it does, great, I will definitely change the text here and would like to add even more detail on how to configure this.

Reviewer: yeah we get it for free from https://gocloud.dev/howto/blob/#s3-compatible :)

Author: Nice!!! I will add your suggested changes as well as add a little note about that in the S3 (compatible) backend section.

> Pulumi stores metadata about your infrastructure so that it can manage your cloud resources. This metadata is called _state_ and is how Pulumi knows when and how to create, read, delete, or update cloud resources. Pulumi stores this metadata, the state, in a _backend_ of your choosing. Options include the Pulumi Service, a secure and reliable hosted application with policies and safeguards to facilitate team collaboration, in addition to object storage in AWS, Azure, GCP, or a simple filesystem. Most of the time, you don't need to explicitly worry about state and backends, but in some cases you may.

Reviewer: why do we not need to worry about state? This is a question I continually get asked

Author: Updated to:

> Most of the time, you don't need to explicitly worry about state and backends, as the default options are designed to work seamlessly out-of-the-box, but in some cases you may choose to more explicitly configure backend options.

A bit more color on my take (this was our mindset when initially designing the SaaS):

I think of this like AWS CloudFormation. Most users think that CloudFormation doesn't have "state." Of course it does! But why do folks think that that? Because CloudFormation (like ARM and other services) was designed to abstract this away from the end user experience. The state is held within a database, hidden from end users, within the managed CloudFormation service. We have attempted to offer the same experience with Pulumi's Service backend. I personally wouldn't want to use a system that made me think of state regularly, as it's just a messy detail that we all wish didn't need to exist. Many of our end users are coming from Terraform, where "it's all about the state," however, which I think leads them to go down these paths probably earlier than is strictly required. Plus, the simple reality is that there _is_ state and because we're not a managed AWS service, there are absolutely cases where state is an unavoidable reality.

Reviewer: 👌

> > Pulumi state does not include your cloud credentials. Credentials are kept local to your client &mdash; wherever the CLI runs &mdash; even when using the managed Pulumi Service backend. Pulumi _does_ store configuration and secrets, but encrypts those secrets using your chosen encryption provider. To learn more, see [Configuration and Secrets]({{< relref "config" >}}).

Reviewer: I would suggest we advise users to ensure they are using the secrets provider

## Backends

Pulumi supports two classes of  _backends_ for storing your infrastructure state:

- **Service**: a managed cloud experience using the online or self-hosted Pulumi Service application

> - **Self-Managed**: an object store on your local filesystem, or in AWS, Azure, or Google Cloud

Reviewer: AWS compatible*

> Pulumi's open source SDK works great with all backends, although some details differ between them.

Reviewer: Why mention `open source` here?

Author: I am just conscious that most people scrutinizing this page will be more sensitive to the open source nature, and wanted to reinforce that the SDK is indeed open source. However, I can drop it, definitely semi-superfluous.

Reviewer: Now I understand :) Thanks for that!

### Deciding On a Backend

> Pulumi uses the Service backend hosted at <a href="https://app.pulumi.com" target="_blank">`app.pulumi.com`</a> by default as it provides the best combination of usability, safety, and security for most users. Important features include:

Reviewer: Do we need to mention that features can vary by pricing tier?

- Robust state management, with transactional checkpointing for fault tolerance and recovery
- Concurrent state locking to prevent corrupting your infrastructure state in a team environment
- Full deployment history for auditing and rollback purposes
- Encrypted state in transit and at rest
- Managed encryption and key management for secrets
- Secure access to cloud resource metadata, with client-side authentication to your cloud provider
- Team policies, including Policy as Code and Role Based Access Control (RBAC)

> The Pulumi Service backend requires no additional configuration after [installing the CLI]({{< relref "/docs/get-started/install" >}}). Pulumi offers this backend hosted online as a free service for individuals with [advanced tiers]({{< relref "/pricing" >}}) for teams and enterprises (with <a href="https://app.pulumi.com/site/trial" target="_blank">free trials</a>. It has successfully undergone multiple security audits including SOC2, pen-testing, and more.

Reviewer: We should link to the SOC2 announcement

Author: Definitely, AFAIK it's not set to go out until next week, however, and I'm hoping to have merged by then :smile:

> To learn more about the Pulumi Service backend's design, including why it doesn't need your cloud credentials, see [Pulumi Service Architecture](#pulumi-service-architecture). If you are interested in the hosting your own instance, see the [Self-Hosting User Guide]({{< relref "/docs/guides/self-hosted" >}}).

> Pulumi also lets you manage state yourself using a self-managed backend. This stores state as simple JSON files in AWS S3, Azure Blob Store, Google Cloud Storage, or on your local filesystem. This trades off some amount of reliability for additional control over where metadata is stored. For instance, you will need to manually configure secure access, encryption, and history, and devise your own concurrency control and recovery capabilities. To choose such a backend, use the `pulumi login` command as documented below.

Reviewer: I think it's important to call out that this is not a paid for service. It doesn't read that way right now

```sh
$ pulumi login file:///app/data
```

> **Note:** If you use a relative path (e.g. `file://./einstein`), it will be relative to _the current working directory_.

Notice that `pulumi login --local` is simply syntactic sugar for `pulumi login file://~`.

##### Logging Into the AWS S3 Backend

To use the AWS S3 backend, pass the `s3://<bucket-path>` as your `<backend-url>`:

```sh
$ pulumi login s3://<bucket-path>
```

To configure credentials and authorize access, please see the [AWS Session documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-go/api/aws/session/). For additional configuration options, see [AWS Setup]({{< relref "/docs/intro/cloud-providers/aws/setup" >}}). If you're new to AWS S3, see [the AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/UsingBucket.html).

##### Logging Into the Azure Blob Storage Backend

To use the Azure Blob Storage backend, pass the `azblob://<container-path>` as your `<backend-url>`:

```sh
$ pulumi login azblob://<container-path>
```

> To tell Pulumi what Azure storage account to use, set the `AZURE_STORAGE_ACCOUNT` environment variable. Also est either `AZURE_STORAGE_KEY` or `AZURE_STORAGE_SAS_TOKEN` to authorize access. For additional configuration options, see [Azure Setup]({{< relref "/docs/intro/cloud-providers/azure/setup" >}}). If you're new to Azure Blob Storage, see [the Azure documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/storage-quickstart-blobs-cli).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To tell Pulumi what Azure storage account to use, set the `AZURE_STORAGE_ACCOUNT` environment variable. Also, set either `AZURE_STORAGE_KEY` or `AZURE_STORAGE_SAS_TOKEN` to authorize access. For additional configuration options, see [Azure Setup]({{< relref "/docs/intro/cloud-providers/azure/setup" >}}). If you're new to Azure Blob Storage, see [the Azure documentation](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/blobs/storage-quickstart-blobs-cli).
```

##### Logging Into the Google Cloud Storage Backend

To use the Google Cloud Storage backend pass the `gs://<bucket-path>` as your `<backend-url>`:

```sh
$ pulumi login gs://<my-pulumi-state-bucket>
```

To configure credentials for this backend, see [Application Default Credentials](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/production). For additional configuration options, see [GCP Setup]({{< relref "/docs/intro/cloud-providers/gcp/setup" >}}). If you're new to Google Cloud Storage, see [the Google Cloud documentation](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/quickstarts).

### Logging Out

To log out from your currently chosen backend, run the [`pulumi logout` CLI command]({{< relref "/docs/reference/cli/pulumi_logout" >}}). This will remove all credentials information from `~/.pulumi/credentials.json` and you will need to log in again before performing any subsequent stack or state operations.

> To change backends, simply run `pulumi logout` followed by `pulumi login` with the desired backend (or just leave it blank for the default).

Reviewer 2: or use the `PULUMI_BACKEND_URL` env var?

### Migrating Between Backends

It is possible to start with one backend and then later migrate to another. This is common if you have began your project with Pulumi using a self-managed backend but later decided to adopt the Pulumi Service for easier use within your team. This section describes how to perform this operation, however, if you would like our assistance with a migration, [please get in touch](/contact).

> The state for a stack includes information about its backend as well as other unique information such as its encryption provider. As such, moving a stack between backends isn't as simple as merely copying its state file. [The `pulumi stack rename` command]({{< relref "/docs/reference/cli/pulumi_stack_rename" >}}) can be used for simple renames within the same backend, however, Pulumi also supports migrating stacks between backends using the `pulumi stack export` and `pulumi stack import` commands, which understand how to perform the necessary translations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The state for a stack includes information about its backend as well as other unique information such as its encryption provider. As such, moving a stack between backends isn't as simple as merely copying its state file. The [`pulumi stack rename` command]({{< relref "/docs/reference/cli/pulumi_stack_rename" >}}) can be used for simple renames within the same backend; however, Pulumi also supports migrating stacks between backends using the `pulumi stack export` and `pulumi stack import` commands, which understand how to perform the necessary translations.
```

As an example, imagine you'd like to migrate a stack named `my-app-production` from a self-managed backend to the Pulumi Service backend. To perform the migration, run the following sequence commands:

```sh
# switch to the backend/stack we want to export
$ pulumi login --local
$ pulumi stack select my-app-production

# export the stack's checkpoint to a local file
$ pulumi stack export --show-secrets --file my-app-production.checkpoint.json

# logout and login to the desired new backend
$ pulumi logout
$ pulumi login # default to Pulumi Service

# create a new stack with the same name on pulumi.com
$ pulumi stack init my-app-production

# import the new existing checkpoint into pulumi.com
$ pulumi stack import --file my-app-production.checkpoint.json
```

After performing these steps, your stack will now be under the management of the Pulumi Service. All subsequent operations should be performed using this new backend.

> > **Note:**: After migration, your stack's state will be managed by the the Pulumi Service backend, but the stack will continue using the same secrets provider.  You can separately [change the secrets provider]({{< relref "docs/intro/concepts/config#changing-the-secrets-provider-for-a-stack" >}}) for your stack if needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note:**: After migration, your stack's state will be managed by the the Pulumi Service backend, but the stack will continue using the same secrets provider. You can separately [change the secrets provider]({{< relref "docs/intro/concepts/config#changing-the-secrets-provider-for-a-stack" >}}) for your stack if needed.
```

### Pulumi Service Architecture

> This Pulumi Service is comprised of two Internet-accessible endpoints &mdash; a web application at `app.pulumi.com` (called [the "Pulumi Console"]({{< relref "/docs/intro/console" >}})) and a REST API at `api.pulumi.com` &mdash; with an assortment of cloud infrastructure to support its features. A simplified diagram of its architecture looks like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Pulumi Service is comprised of two Internet-accessible endpoints &mdash; a web application at `app.pulumi.com` (called [the "Pulumi Console"]({{< relref "/docs/intro/console" >}})) and a REST API at `api.pulumi.com` &mdash; with an assortment of cloud infrastructure to support its features. A simplified diagram of its architecture looks like this:
```

<img src="/images/docs/reference/state_saas.png" alt="Pulumi Service Architecture" class="img-bordered">

> The Pulumi Service doesn't ever acquire your cloud credentials, and does not communicate with your cloud provider directly. Instead, the CLI itself coordinates with both the Pulumi Service's API and your cloud provider's directly. This ensures your IAM and key management does not need to change while adopting Pulumi. In particular, if you are running Pulumi deployments from [within a CI/CD environment]({{< relref "/docs/guides/continuous-delivery" >}}), you can rely on existing mechanisms and security practices that your organization has already put in place. The Pulumi Service is reliable, secure, and has undergone multiple audits, including SOC2 and professional pen-testing.

Reviewer 2: "...and your cloud provider's..." wasn't very explicit, so I took a shot at filling in the missing details.

```suggestion
The Pulumi Service doesn't ever acquire your cloud credentials, and does not communicate with your cloud provider directly. Instead, the CLI itself coordinates with both the Pulumi Service's API and your cloud provider's API directly. This ensures your IAM and key management does not need to change while adopting Pulumi. In particular, if you are running Pulumi deployments from [within a CI/CD environment]({{< relref "/docs/guides/continuous-delivery" >}}), you can rely on existing mechanisms and security practices that your organization has already put in place. The Pulumi Service is reliable, secure, and has undergone multiple audits, including SOC2 and professional pen-testing.
```

It is possible to host your own version of the Pulumi Service in your private cloud environment. Pulumi offers versions that run natively on AWS, Azure, GCP, Kubernetes, or simple virtual machine-based private and hybrid cloud environments. The architecture is very similar, but is privately hosted and does not depend on public access over the Internet:

<img src="/images/docs/reference/state_enterprise.png" alt="Pulumi Enterprise Architecture" class="img-bordered">

To learn more about self-host options, see [Self-Hosted Pulumi Service]({{< relref "/docs/guides/self-hosted" >}}) or [Contact Us]({{< relref "/pricing#contact" >}}).

## Advanced State

> Pulumi is designed to abstract state management away from you so that you can operate in terms of declarative infrastructure as code. In certain advanced cases, you may want or need to interact with state more directly. In those cases, the following topics may be helpful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pulumi is designed to abstract state management away from you so that you can operate in terms of declarative infrastructure as code. In certain advanced cases, you may want or need to interact with state more directly. In those cases, the following sections may be helpful.
```

> > Due to the nature of the Pulumi Service backend being a managed service, it is the best at recovering from failure gracefully and shielding you from advanced state topics. If you choose to use an alternative backend, it is likely you'll need to be more familiar with the topics in this section.

Reviewer 2: Not sure this note is needed. We basically covered this above.

### Importing Existing Resources

> Pulumi supports importing resources that were already created resources outside of Pulumi, such as resources created using the cloud console, a cloud CLI or SDK, or even another infrastructure as code tool. The basic support imports resource metadata into your Pulumi state, and can also generate the source code in your chosen language to match that state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pulumi supports importing resources that were already created outside of Pulumi, such as resources created using the cloud console, a cloud CLI or SDK, or even another infrastructure as code tool. Resource metadata is imported into your Pulumi state and source code is generated in your chosen language to match that state.
```

To learn more about importing existing resources, see [Importing Infrastructure]({{< relref "/docs/guides/adopting/import" >}}).

### Checkpoints

> Pulumi state is usually stored in a transactional snapshot called a _checkpoint_. Pulumi records checkpoints early and often as it executes so that it can operate reliably, similar to how database transactions work. The basic functions of state allow Pulumi to diff your program's goal state against the last known update, recover from failure, and destroy resources accurately to clean up afterwards, and the checkpoint format augments this with additional failure recovery capabilities in the face of partial failure. The Pulumi Service backends records every checkpoint so that it is possible to recover from exotic failure scenarios that other backends may have more trouble recovering from as they typically store a singular Pulumi state file.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pulumi state is usually stored in a transactional snapshot called a _checkpoint_. Pulumi records checkpoints early and often as it executes so that Pulumi can operate reliably, similar to how database transactions work. The basic functions of state allow Pulumi to diff your program's goal state against the last known update, recover from failure, and destroy resources accurately to clean up afterwards. The checkpoint format augments this with additional failure recovery capabilities in the face of partial failure.

The Pulumi Service backends records every checkpoint so that it is possible to recover from exotic failure scenarios. Self-managed backends may have more trouble recovering from these situations as they typically store a singular Pulumi state file.

```
